---
layout: post
title:  "Do Infinite Pencils Exist??"
categories: math
---

Does infinity exist? This [comment](https://mathoverflow.net/a/23521)
from MathOverflow riled my feathers a bit:

> I've heard a worse story. A college instructor claimed in Number
> Theory class that there are only finitely many primes. When
> confronted by a student, her reply was: "If you think there are
> infinitely many, write them all down." She was on tenure track, but
> need I add, didn't get tenure.

What a dumb teacher, right? Everyone knows there are an infinite number
of primes! Haven't you heard of Euclid?

Except I think she's right. (Depending on what she meant, exactly.) 

I *believe* this professor was attempting to make a subtle point that
many students of mathematics tend to
miss. That is, they mistakenly believe that **infinity** actually
exists. Like, in the real world.

If I tell someone to imagine an "infinite number of pencils," usually
they picture a *bunch* of pencils. Like, more than they could ever
count. An empire state building made out of pencils. An ocean full of
pencils. Mars. But pencils.

That's not really what **infinty** means, mathematically. When a mathematician says
**infinity** they mean a *repeatable process that we can keep doing forever.*

For example, let's imagine I'm standing at the blackboard and
I ask the class to give me a pencil. Now I have 1 pencil. That's our
repeatable process. I do it a second time, and I have 2 pencils. A
third time, and three. And so on and so forth.

Imagine I never stop asking for pencils. Ever. How many pencils do I
have, at that indeterminate point in the future? A mathematician would
say an **infinite** number of pencils.

But you see, I'd never *really* get to an "infinite" quantity of
pencils. **Infinity** is purely a work of imagination. Eventually I'll
have to stop asking for pencils. I'll get hungry, or get old or
die. Or we'll run out of wood or something. Or we'll exhaust all the
matter in the universe and there will be nothing but pencils floating
around in the vastness of space. Then who would ask for the pencil,
and who would give it?[^1]

Anyway, back to the primes. Yes, the student is correct in that there
is an infinite number of primes. (And by that we mean there is a
repeatable process[^2] for generating primes which we can repeat until the
heat death of the universe.)

But the teacher is also right, in her way. If we built a computer to
count all the primes, it would eventually run out of memory. Even if
we turned the whole universe into a computer, eventually we'd run out
of stars and junk to fuel our prime-counting computer. Thus the number of primes we'll ever be able to count is finitely bounded by the size of our universe.[^3] 

That's... funny? Sad? I don't know. Why did I even write this?

\- Mitchell

-----

[^1]: If infinity doesn't really exist, then why do we talk about it so much? Because it's a useful approximation of reality. Of course, it doesn't make sense to ask, "if I keep asking for pencils how many pencils will I have?" But suppose instead of asking for 1 pencil each time, I asked for 1/4th a pencil, and then 1/9th, and then $$1/n^2$$ of a pencil for ever and ever. How many pencils would I have? The answer is that I will get real close to 1.645 pencils, but never more than that. Why's that useful? Well, ever try to build a rocket? No? Me neither.

[^2]: Euclid's proof is famously [not constructive](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid%27s_theorem#Euclid's_proof), so it doesn't directly give us a method for constructing a new prime. I prefer the [proof](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclid%27s_theorem#Proof_by_construction) by Filip Saidak that does.

[^3]: I wonder how many digits it has?
