---
title: "Physical Manifestations, Part 2: Math"
layout: post
categories: mathematics
---
Quantifying concreteness. How a word is depends on the range of things that you can connect with it. Stone-henge vs. rectangles.

## Mathematics
What about math? What even is math? Most people have trouble answering this
question, but let's take a stab at it with the "physical manifestations" idea.

Take geometry, for instance. More specifically, a triangle. How does the
abstract idea of a triangle physically manifest? Equations and drawings on
paper, chalkboards. Symbols, shuffled around by "rules of inference". [The
Triforce](https://zelda.gamepedia.com/Triforce). Books on geometry. The air
vibrations when you say the word "triangle". The brains of mathematicians and
children playing with blocks.

But there is no one, single real "triangle". Every triangle-like thing will be
slightly non-ideal, some atoms out of place. These physical manifestations are
all related somehow by a common regularity. Their representations in our brains
all have similar neural activations, which makes us think of one when we observe the other.
Triangles are a computationally convenient way to think about the universe.

But what if everyone who knows what a triangle is perished today? Sure,
triangle-like things would still exist. Maybe some trees might fall into a shape
that looks like the Triforce. But if no one's around to recognize that it looks
like the Triforce, does it matter? If you're the only person alive on Earth, do
you need a word for triangle?

If another intelligent species evolved on Earth, would they necessarily come up
with a word for triangle-like things (or $$\pi$$, or entropy)? What if their
brains are different from ours, and the neural activations line up differently?
Who knows?

So math matters. But only so far as it's physically manifested. Some math may be
inherent, universal truths, but I don't really care. Thinking this way keeps me
grounded when encountering unfamiliar abstractions (like information theory).
Who came up with this abstraction (Claude Shannon)? What physical context were
they thinking about when they invented it (making telegraphs better)? Do their
assumptions (axioms) still hold for my situation? (...sometimes)

It also keeps me from digging too deep into really theoretical math. How will
this concept physically manifest? Will it be useful, or will it only live in the
heads of mathematicians?

I could say more about what math is, but maybe in another post.

## Language

So what is math? Math is for people, I think. It's a language for communicating
problem solving ideas with less ambiguity.[^3] If your situation (building a
house) fits these some axioms (geometry), then you can use these theorems (the
Pythagorem Theorem). It's also framework of thinking, a set of rules for
shuffling around symbols, meant to guide your intuition away from fallacies.
It's the collective knowledge of all people on Earth, regarding patterns that
occur in our universe. It is never perfect, since math is an abstraction
that ignores part of the real world. [All models are wrong, some are useful.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All_models_are_wrong)

[^3]: Rigor is relative, but that's for a different post I think.
